# 1.3 Best security practices

There are various security features for cryptocurrency wallets. Users can find many within a wallet itself, but they should also consider other recommendations.

The most common security feature for wallets, both hardware and software, is that they are *forgiving*. This means that if users lose access to the wallet, they can restore it. Losing access can happen if the wallet is accidentally deleted or if the user loses access to the computer or hardware device where the wallet is installed.

If a wallet is backed up with a seed phrase (also referred to as a *recovery phrase* or *mnemonic* – meaning ‘help to remember’ in Latin), it can be restored. A seed phrase is a list of words generated when a user creates a wallet. Usually, the list contains 24 randomly chosen words out of a fixed list of words. The count of words can also be smaller, 12 or 15, for example. The user needs to write down these words on paper and keep them in a safe place. Any person with access to the seed phrase can restore a wallet on a new computer and have full access to funds. The reason for this is that with the seed phrase, a master key can be generated, from which all other wallet keys are derived. To learn more about generating a seed phrase and restoring a wallet, read the *Key generation for wallets* section.

It is also recommended not to display the list in front of computers and mobile devices that have a camera. Besides storing the seed on paper, one can also use a metal crypto wallet. These wallets enable storing the seed phrase on metal plates or a ring, thereby protecting it from time decay and fire.

Another good security practice that wallets provide is asking you to set a password (passphrase) when creating a wallet. This password is then requested every time a user wants to unlock specific wallet functionality, such as signing a transaction or viewing the secret seed. This is useful if someone gains access to your computer with the wallet, because they cannot access any funds if they do not know the wallet’s password.

For a significant amount of funds, a hardware wallet is the most secure option. When making a transaction, the hardware wallet displays the details and requires confirmation on its own screen, so even if a computer is compromised, the device remains secure because it cannot be directly controlled.

Hardware wallets can also connect to lightweight wallets, allowing for interaction with decentralized exchanges. In this case, your funds do not leave your wallet until the trade is complete. In the case of a standard crypto exchange, you have to temporarily give up control of your funds and place them in the exchange’s wallet before trading. Most of the time, this is not an issue, since many exchanges follow rigorous security practices. If you are using a non-decentralized exchange, it is recommended that you always enable an additional security step for login and transaction confirmation. An example of such a security step is [two-factor authentication](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-factor_authentication) (2FA). Because exchanges are highly targeted, it is not recommended to leave significant amounts of funds at an exchange for long periods of time. It is also worth noting that poorly managed exchanges can go bankrupt, so it makes sense for a user to take the time to consider their options before deciding on one.
