# 1.5 Key generation for wallets

When generating a seed phrase, most wallets follow the Bitcoin Improvement Proposal 39 ([BIP-39](https://bips.dev/39/)), which is a standard for generating a seed phrase. The standard defines a list of [2048 words](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039/english.txt) where the first four letters of each word are unique and identify it unambiguously. A word can also be shorter than four letters. The number 2048 is equal 2 to the power of 11. This means that every single word defines a unique sequence of 11 [bits](https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bit). If a wallet generates a 24-word seed phrase, it contains 264 bits of information (11*24). Out of these 264 bits, 256 bits are used to set the master key of our wallet, from which all other keys are generated. The master key is sometimes referred to as the root key.

The remaining 8 bits are used for verifying the master key with a [checksum](https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Checksum). A checksum is a fixed-length sequence of data computed from input data of arbitrary length. It is used to verify data and relies on the fact that the probability of a collision (two different input data producing the same checksum) is negligible. This means that when generating a seed phrase, the last word cannot be arbitrarily chosen and is partly set by the checksum. We say *partly* because for a 24-word seed phrase, the last word contains 11 bits of information, and only 8 bits are used for the checksum. Because 3 bits can be chosen freely, only a limited subset of words from the 2048 word list can be used.

The [Mnemonic Generation (BIP39) Simply Explained](https://medium.com/coinmonks/mnemonic-generation-bip39-simply-explained-e9ac18db9477) blog on Medium walks the reader through a simple example of generating a concrete seed phrase. Once the seed phrase is generated, the master key is set, and other keys (public and private) are generated with cryptographic methods from it.

We note that the sequence of 24 words can be generated offline, without an internet connection, which allows for cold storage. In theory, there could be a collision, meaning that two different users end up with the same sequence of words for a seed phrase. In practice, the probability of such an event is negligible because the number of possible options for generating a 24-word seed phrase is 2 to the power of 256, which equals around 10 to the power of 77. To give you an impression of magnitude, there are estimated 10 to the power of 18 grains of sand in the world, which is far less than possible seed phrase sequences. As the chance of two people picking up the same grain of sand is negligible, so is the chance of two equal seed phases being generated. This is also true for seed phrases of 12 and 15 words in length. These provide 128- and 160-bit long master keys and approximately 10^38 and 10^48 options for seed phrase generation.
