# 1.2 Introduction to cryptocurrency wallets  

As mentioned in the previous section, a cryptocurrency wallet provides a frontend for storing and managing cryptocurrencies and tokens. Under the hood, wallets manage cryptographic keys, which users need to sign transactions. To learn more about keys, read the *Cryptographic keys* and *Key generation for wallets* sections that are part of lesson one.  

In this section, we will cover various types of wallets tailored to different use cases. The first major categories are *software wallets* and *hardware wallets*. Software wallets are digital wallets that users install on their computers, either as desktop applications or as browser extensions. Hardware wallets are small computers, often the size of a USB stick, that run wallet software. They connect to a user’s computer, where compatible wallet software must be installed to support the connected wallet. One of the advantages of hardware wallets is security – the communication between the hardware wallet and the computer is restricted. Because of this, hardware wallets are very difficult to hack. Another category is a paper wallet, where private and public keys are written down or printed.

A software wallet can be further categorized into two types: *full-node* and *lightweight*. Full-node wallets download the entire blockchain history and connect directly to the blockchain. Lightweight wallets connect to a server that contains a synced node and posts a request to query blockchain data and process transactions. The advantage of full-node wallets is that you don’t have to trust a remote server if unsure of its operator. The downside is that you *need* to sync your wallet node with the latest blockchain data. This may take some time if your computer is disconnected from the network for a while. IO is working on a protocol and network called [Mithril](https://mithril.network/) to provide full-node wallets with quick synchronization, and lightweight wallets with the same security guarantees as full-node wallets.

Wallets can also be labeled as *hot* and *cold*. Cold wallets remain offline, while hot wallets are connected to the internet. This means that hot wallets are more user-friendly and accessible, but easier for hackers to steal. Web-based, mobile, and desktop wallets are hot wallets. Paper and hardware wallets are cold wallets.

Another key differentiation between wallets is whether they are *custodial* or *non-custodial*. For custodial wallets, users do not have complete control over their tokens, and the private keys required to sign transactions are held by the entity that provides the wallet (eg, exchanges). Users can access these wallets only through their web browser. Handing over the security of the wallet to another entity can be risky. Exchanges often follow rigorous security standards, as they are highly prized targets for hackers.  

Wallets support various functionality. Some wallets support fund operations only within a specific blockchain. There are also multi-cryptocurrency wallets, and some can manage over 100 different currencies. Examples of such wallets include [MetaMask](https://metamask.io/), [Trust](https://trustwallet.com/), and [Exodus](https://www.exodus.com/), as well as hardware wallets such as [Trezor](https://trezor.io/) and [Ledger](https://www.ledger.com/). Wallets can also offer staking functionality if they support PoS cryptocurrencies. Web-browser wallets can also connect to DApps and generate transactions that interact with smart contracts. DApp developers decide which wallets their DApp is going to support. Wallets can also display images of NFTs or browse NFTs on market platforms. IO plans to add voting capabilities to its Lace wallet, enabling users to vote on proposals supporting the Cardano ecosystem.
