# 4.2 Concrete numbers *(somewhat technical)*

In this section, we present some numbers around staking and Cardano. The maximum supply of ada is 45bn. At the time of writing, there is around 37bn in circulation. The latest number can be found on the official [Cardano page](https://cardano.org/insights/supply/). In the pre-launch sales event for Cardano that lasted from September 2015 to January 2017, around 26bn ada was sold to the public, and around 5bn ada was distributed to the Cardano Foundation, IO, and Emurgo. You can read more about this on the [genesis documentation](https://cardano.org/genesis/#stats) page.

The current saturation limit of a pool is around 74m ada. The limit is calculated with the following formula: (45bn \- reserves) / *k* \= (37bn / 500\) \= 74m. This value changes slightly every epoch.

The *k* parameter can also be changed. If it is raised, the Cardano staking system may become slightly more decentralized. More about this in the IO blog [Staking parameters and network optimization](https://iohk.io/en/blog/posts/2022/10/27/staking-parameters-and-network-optimization-where-next-for-k-and-min-fee/). The blog says: ‘Privately held pools by large companies and investors amounted to 35% of the total stake in the ecosystem at the end of 2022\. They would most likely split their stake into smaller pools, not adding much to decentralization.’

Annual rewards for end users who delegate are, at the time of writing, mostly between 2% and 3%. These rewards differ for different stake pools, depending on the pool's performance and fees. Cardano stake pools have two types of fees, which are taken from the total rewards distributed to a stake pool. There is a fixed minimum fee of 170 ada set by the protocol, which can also be increased by the pool operator. And there is a variable margin % fee that is set only by a pool operator. So, the total rewards distributed to end users that delegate with a pool is: (pool\_rewards \- fixed\_fee) / (1 \- margin). View pool statistics from various Cardano explorers listed on the [Cardano explorer](https://explorer.cardano.org/) page. As we will show in the next section, Lace also provides functionality for querying pool information.
